and joining us tonight on the debate for
the full hour Justin trot J he's
president of the free thought
Association of Canada author Kathy
Shadle who writes a blog called five
feet of fury calm United Church minister
Greta Vosburg
the chair of the Canadian Centre for
progressive Christianity jordan peterson
professor of psychology at the
university of toronto and the author of
maps of meaning the architecture of
belief and TVO viewers will well
recognize dr. Rob Buckman author of can
we be good without God behavior
belonging and the need to believe well
thanks everybody for being here this
evening for what I'm sure will be a
stimulating discussion we want to remind
everybody that our Thursday program is
always informed by our viewers so they
have sent us their emails online telling
us what show they think we ought to do
and tonight we had quite a conversation
going online about this so this is what
we're doing tonight
we also would invite all of you to be
involved in the broadcast send us your
Twitter's your emails however you like
to get to us at the agenda at t v-- org
the agenda at t v-- org will try to get
as many of your questions and comments
on the air as possible over the course
of the hour i want to put up two emails
that we received already and this will
start our discussion this evening here's
the first one it says pure and simple
i'm a theist and i think the ads are
wonderful the ads in question we will
see in a second here's the second one i
am so glad to see that finally another
view will be aired to the public as
agnostic leaning strongly towards
atheism and active humanist I feel that
our voices have been silenced for too
long we've had to injure the ever
accepted presence of religious
oppression in our society we have far
too long been forced to remain in the
closet about who we are for fear of
bigotry let's flip that over and hatred
towards us and even threats of violence
simply because we do not believe in God
Zeus Allah or any other so-called higher
supernatural power humanists believe in
reason justice equality fairness and
compassion for all humans well what are
we talking about here tonight we are
talking about something that Toronto's
Transit System has decided to start a
new ad campaign for atheism shall we
show this here it comes there's probably
no God so
says the ad now stop worrying and enjoy
your life that's what the ads say the
so-called atheist bus so let's go around
the horn and get some opinions on this
there's probably no God now stop
worrying and enjoy your life
Rob Bachmann first impressions well I
love the English campaign the word
probably was put in by the Advertising
Standards Association is there there's
no proof which of course they can't be
the great thing is it if you can get
over the idea that there's probably no
God so we're on our own to sort out our
own messes and in many respects it's
that bit it's not there's no no point in
a sterol argument whether there is or is
not it's only the influence on behavior
that really matters right absolutely
welcome it Justin what's the purpose of
these ads to generate the discussion
that I think we've seen to really bring
atheists and non theists into the
mainstream and we've seen that the
United Church and various secular and
and liberal leading Muslim and Christian
and Jewish organizations have joined us
to have a discussion on our website on
their websites to really take this to
the next level and show people that
atheists have a point of view not just
on God but on questions of ethics
questions of free expression questions
of religious accommodation some of the
really very important questions of the
day Kathy your view when you saw this ad
well it's certainly an improvement I'm
old enough to remember when the public
face of atheism was Madalyn Murray
O'Hair rather a purposefully
unattractive woman who was so
universally despised that she ended up
being someone dismembered her with a
chainsaw so I'd like to congratulate
everybody for at least toning it down
slightly and presenting a slightly more
attractive view at least we know that no
one is going to be left to die in the
desert over this
grinev Oscar I was amused when I first
saw the ad because the first time I saw
a picture of it it had a picture of
Richard Dawkins beside it and and I
thought how on earth did they get away
with putting probably in there with
Richard Dawkins because idea probably is
that it should be completely taken out
of the language relating to God he's
vitriolic about anyone who assumes that
the tiny little whiff of a possibility
should be a completely
so so I laughed when I saw the probably
the conversation has to take place for
exactly the same reasons that have been
articulated already but I do think that
we need to get beyond just the
conversation about whether there is or
whether there isn't - how it affects our
lives and how we choose to live our
lives whether we do or whether we don't
believe shall do some of that tonight
Jordan your thoughts I think it's a
juvenile publicity stunt pulled off by
people who really neither know about nor
care about the actual issues get off the
fence and tell me what you really think
you know really no redeeming features
whatsoever you've heard Justin say it's
actually kind of provoked a bit of
discussion well I don't really regard
atheists as an oppressed group
personally I don't think there's any
real historical evidence for that
especially in North America and Europe
and at least recently and I think the
debate is going fine without this sort
of stunt and I think it's basically a
media manipulation ploy it's Goodwin
intrude in there if I may you say the
discussion is going fine but I think
you're alluding to the theists club
discussion you see in the pages of our
national paper is that religious
organizations are frequently invited to
discuss issues of ethics issues of the
interplay between science and faith
issues of the reasonable accommodations
of religion you rarely see an atheist or
a proclaimed secular humanist from an
organization or not actually being
invited to participate until relatively
recently so when you say that our
country is becoming more pluralistic and
more say that what you're saying that
we're including more people in the
discussion I think no I didn't say that
I think that a theists are not part of
that discussion
Laurel quite you've seen Dawkins you've
seen Hitchens you've seen all these guys
that write these books on atheism get
massive amounts of media play so it's
not like they're excluded if anything
they're dominant so anyway three years
ago that's correct
what's that Richard Dawkins book came
out about three to four years ago yeah
so I'd like and it's got a perfectly
fine a perfectly fine reception I mean
and there's no evidence that he's being
oppressed even though maybe he should be
I don't think I used the word oppressed
today I think his point well a fairly
recent phenomenon that non-believers
have been invited about taking Isis
country what a little urchin Russell I
mean why I am NOT a Christian is still
in print God loved us after all these
years complete with all it's missing
juvenile petulance but so this is Nathan
you like I said I I'm dating myself but
seemed to me that every month
Madalyn Murray O'Hair was on Phil
Donahue and they would have a little
fight and you know this this isn't new
perhaps it's your youth that makes you
think that it's a new argument well how
can I ask you about that word probably
Rob Buckman brought it up a second ago
is it still considered provocative in
2009 to say there probably is no god I
can't imagine I mean given the
atmosphere in universities alone
although you know more about that than I
do
i I hazard a guess that the real
provocative notion is that you're a
believer as the students at the
University of Calgary who are pro-lifers
discovered when they tried to have a
public discussion and the discussion was
literally shut down by people who were
calling themselves secular and liberal
so I think sometimes the the default
rebel position these days is is the
religious one but it depends on what
reach and I think of the world you're in
now that's an interesting go ahead Greta
right there are a lot of people who have
been within Christian community mainline
or evangelical however who have not been
exposed to any kind of support within
their communities or from the the
atheist or humanist communities who have
wanted to seek beyond traditional
doctrinal experiences of their faith and
who have intuited or read or thought
themselves to the edges of those
doctrinal positions and and want to go
further shake their worldviews a little
bit this ad campaign has allowed them to
be affirmed in a way that they haven't
been affirmed before and that is a very
important part of what I think this
campaign has done and has allowed them
to seek out and find some community and
that's a big part of what what we are we
do at the Canadian Centre for
progressive Christianity is try to bring
people who are very isolated within
faith communities who have been brought
up in traditional Christianity have
conversations with other people so that
they don't feel so isolated because I
don't know that it is that a faith
position is is necessarily the one
that's marginalized these days perhaps
in in secular culture it may seem to me
but a lot of people have grown up within
faith traditions and and Christian faith
traditions I mean and they have these
very pervasive beliefs and they invade
the way that they understand themselves
and what they've done that's right and
wrong and how they're going to be judged
for those actions robot owners III I
think I agree with you strongly I
strongly disagree with Jordans use of
the word juvenile because I think the
word probably in there is not juvenile
it's actually quite thoughtful and it
really is I know it was put there as I
said by the advertising Council not by
the original people but it's it's a
fabulous way of saying what you believe
cannot be proven which is a very
important definition of belief and
therefore it makes it mature not
juvenile yeah I mean when we decided the
freethought Association of Canada on
what ad to use here what slogan we opted
for the probably and that was our choice
the Transit Commission never said
whether we had to put that in there we
think it's more intellectually honest
because we are atheist agnostic skeptics
were doubters we thought that that was a
more profound statement to make but I
also want to pick up on something Greta
said forgive me let me just interrupt
there okay you're not just representing
atheists you are representing a broader
key we're trying to build a big tent and
Greta mentioned community we're big into
that we often hear that atheists and
humanists don't do charitable things
that we have no community and part of
that is true and we're trying to build
that and people often ask us if we're
all we're doing is trying to raise
membership that's not the first priority
but we are trying to get people together
so we can be a voice for them and do
some good things so does their probably
because it's probably an atheist of
course there's no probably right and it
would be much smaller market that we
beat okay I'm sorry I interrupted you
want to make a second point that was it
actually the community aspect that
that's that's the first priority of what
we're doing Jordan well I guess you know
there was a little bit of discussion a
couple of minutes ago about shaking
people's worldviews you know on it it's
not something to be done lightly so so
if you I mean I'm very interested in
what happens to people when their belief
systems collapse and not only what
happens to people individually but also
socially and so what I've learned about
that that's most profound I think
probably came from turn-of-the-century
thinkers like Nietzsche or Dostoevsky
Tolstoy who were very much concerned
about the demolition of belief
structures and Nietzsche the philosopher
is a real interesting case in point
because he's the originator of the
famous phrase God is dead
but that isn't the phrase that's just
the phrase that people like to remember
the phrase is God is dead and we have
killed him and there won't be enough
water to wash away the rivers of blood
and the rest of that phrase is a
prophecy for the 20th century that he
wrote 25 years before the 20th century
began stating quite clearly that he
believed that hundreds of millions of
people would be killed in the 20th
century because of the decline of
standard religious beliefs that people
would turn in particular and he
prophesied this as well
in particularly they would turn to
communism so you know none of this is it
none of this is a game very dangerous
whole quote changes the meaning of that
quite simply a lot Rob Buckman rivers of
blood unfortunately are a human
characteristic I would argue with you
very strongly that it was not a decline
of religion that led to so many millions
of dead there have been millions of dead
in the name of religion long before
there was any possibility to climb not
really that argument is also any
arrogance if you add up that argument is
also here and then over yeah go ahead
that's also that's an interesting
argument because in one way it's true
and in one way it's not so the thing
about global scale religions is that
they unite many many millions of people
now within that Union there's relative
peace of course the problem is is that
there's different global religions and
then on the borders between those
religions there's still war now people
who don't like religious systems point
to the battle between religions but they
never really noticed that within the
religions themselves millions of people
are brought into a big tent let's say so
you know you can't have it both ways
religion unites and it divides and if
you're going to you know pay close
attention to the facts you've got to
give due credit to both I do want to
keep the discussion on the ads
themselves but given that you made that
point I feel obliged to let you follow
up I don't think anybody's after forcing
people to convert to atheism we're not
talking about Stalin or Hitler or any of
those really pathetic attempts that
people make to a lot to put on labels
you're talking about that well let me
finish what I was going to say please
what I would like to see is more
critical thinking there are lots of
societies where they have great critical
thinking in science education people
willingly choose to adopt atheism or
secularism I'm thinking of northern
European countries and books have been
written that have studied the levels of
atheism and secularism countries like
Sweden and Denmark they have great
community programs great social welfare
programs they found a way to adopt to a
secular society and build a community
without needing to rely on on churches
ok Jordan let me follow up with you on
this you work in the university
community which is supposed to be about
challenging assumptions and really
getting at the core of things if this
bus campaign makes people question
assumptions some would say assumptions
that are made without thought isn't that
a good thing well I would say a lot of
your assumptions are made without
thought and that's partly because a lot
of the assumptions that people have are
so complicated they can't figure them
out I would also say that you know you
have to believe things like everyone's
everyone's morality is predicated on
faith now there are people who will
object to that characterization but as
far as I'm concerned the psychological
data that pertain to that is is it's
established beyond belief everyone's say
everyone's morality is predicated on
faith and the reason for that is that
there's no first of all there's two
reasons one is that you can't know
everything and what that means is that
at the bottom of your belief structure
something has to bottom out in faith
that takes the place of absolute
knowledge and the second part of it is
is that moral decisions themselves
aren't based on objective descriptions
of the world they're based on something
else like a faith in the faith in the
right thing to do
it's not a matter of scientific debate
melody I gotta say we go wishy-washy
Jordan what you're saying is not
necessarily what the debate is about it
doesn't say there's probably no such
thing as faith it says there's probably
no God and the point about this argument
is really about whether a supernatural
force that affects humankind's destinies
has an existence
and so far until very very recently that
was the assumption and it still at this
moment probably 99.9% of the world
believe that there is such a thing as a
god and the beauty of this debate is
it's challenging the assumption in the
existence of a supernatural being not in
the way you used the word in faith but
in faith in the supernatural that's all
and if we go back if we go back to the
ad campaign themselves and and the
original ad that was written to to
respond to some Christian ads that sent
people to a website that said that they
were going to go to hell for eternity
anyway mature as if they did not believe
in salvation as given to them by Jesus
Christ so so the original ads responded
to that without that as a background
they may not stand alone as well but but
the end of the ad so don't worry now
enjoy your life if you're talking about
not being a god there being no God then
you have nothing to worry about
or as the United Church campaign came
back saying there probably is a God so
if there is a God you don't have
anything to worry about if that's your
world view if your world view is
predicated on their being one or they're
not being one if there is not one then
you don't have anything to worry about
theum the intimation there is that then
God isn't going to do bad things to you
which is a very basic premise in our
world view whose world view the world
view of those who are afraid of that
kind of God and the intimation in that
particular ad campaign or that in the
other ad campaign it's that now God is
going to take care of everything so
either of those foundational worldviews
have problems with them so but the one
that's a belief one that God is going to
take care of everything I think is a
particularly dangerous belief system in
this day and age we can't afford to rely
on a deity that we think is going to
come in and sweep in and make the world
a better place Jordan and Justin well
the issue that raw Buchman wrote raised
with regards to faith well maybe first
it is sure but it doesn't make any
difference because the question then
becomes faith in what okay so look at it
this way
you can have a code
system of faith or an incoherent system
of faith coherent one's better usually
if the faith system is coherent there's
an ultimate value at its pinnacle
whatever that ultimate value is for you
it's God now you might not think so but
the thing about belief is it doesn't
really matter what you think about
belief because you don't understand the
structure of your own beliefs and
generally they're manifested in action
and not in speech and technically
speaking the value that's at the
pinnacle of your hierarchy whatever that
is for all intents and purposes that's
God now you don't have to believe that
and you don't have to know it but that's
still how it works out Justin well here
we are debating faith and atheism which
really is not the the introductory
debate that we were going to have but I
think it does prove that the ad campaign
has been a success because it's an exact
example of the debate we wanted to have
so thank you for participating in that
but to get to what Greta was saying to
get back to that and what I think we're
here to discuss Greta I appreciated your
editorial this week in the Toronto Star
but to tell us that that that ad on the
bus that that's our foundational
worldview to use the words you just use
it's a bit superficial we're trying to
get the debate open then we can talk
about what our worldview is if I can
defend the use of that probably no sorry
the second part now you know stop
wearing and enjoy your life or relax and
enjoy your life who are we talking to
there we're talking to a large group of
people who are starting to think
critically who are starting to think
skeptically and that is scaring them
because they still have one leg in their
faith traditions and they're worried
what if they're wrong what if they are
going to meet their maker and he's not
going to be too happy with them and so
to those people were saying if your
critical thinking leads to a position of
doubt that's okay embrace the doubt
skepticism is not bad and I think that
that's the least problematic of that too
right let me hear from Cathy on this
because we haven't heard from you in a
bit Cathy what do you think of this
second part of the + ad which says now
stop worrying is really how critical
thinking always ends up ik waiting with
the latest leftist fads but I I can't
let this go by you were saying that you
know isn't it wonderful that in certain
countries where they have a lot of
atheism they also have these fabulous
social programs not all of us believe
that nanny-state ism is fabulous and I
would also argue that in the very
patience that you mentioned what is
rushing in to fill the vacuum left by
multicultural atheism in places like
Denmark radical Islam so you can I think
your fight may be with a sort of
Christianity that no longer exists
especially in places like Europe that is
some sort of fantasy from you know two
or three hundred years ago and perhaps
the real problem is one that you'll have
a much harder time dealing with with
mere bus heads do we want to put this
email out ma'am Michael should we go to
this okay we've again we're welcoming
your emails at the agenda TV or we just
got this one in from John who says I
think it's more than a little ironic
that atheists who have four years
protested the presence of faith and
religion in the public arena are now
promoting their views so publicly I
welcome the opportunity for free and
open discussion on the things of God
sure more is that it okay anybody want
to comment on the irony of this pick up
on that me I don't think it's ironic at
all there are some atheists I don't know
very many of them I don't think myself
or dr. Buckman would be in that category
who believed that to be a secular
society is one is one must be devoid of
religiosity no I think that all points
of view religious and secular should be
part of the public space that
politicians can freely talk about
religion so long as the public space
isn't isn't saturated by it to the
extent that it becomes the sort of
dominant ethos that the public space is
no longer a neutral one a little bit of
a prerequisite down south isn't it right
and so there's an issue with that but
here I think we found a much better way
to accommodate that discussion without
endorsing a worldview in the public
space I'm a big fan of free speech you
mentioned the situation with abortion
groups on campus anti-abortion groups
that have been banned you should know
that the freethought associations the
Center for inquiry a group that I direct
our campus groups have been the first
groups to speak out against the banning
of those of those anti-abortion student
clubs who are not hypocritical on our
defense of free speech thank you had
some letters to the editor and some
papers on that that's this week which I
didn't see Rob Buckman talking about
this you may know Arthur Brooks the
social scientist I think he just got to
pretend I don't okay right you just I
think he just took over at the American
Enterprise Institute but he's been
a well-regarded university professor in
thinking upstate New York
Syracuse he argues quite compellingly
with lots of information that in the
aggregate religious people are happier
than non-religious people it's not the
data to prove it
oh I feel have any argument with that at
all I mean happiness in the sense of
distress I mean everybody one of my
television series and we went around a
West Virginia where they did the snake
biting thing you know they dancer and
actually there are studies that show you
this weird sect and is by any standards
including of all Christian churches in
in the u.s. regarding but they are
actually less neurotic and less worried
because they do believe in God will
saving they've they dance with the
snakes and also sup happiness
unfortunately isn't the only criterion
that you can measure by penguin though
isn't it not necessarily necessarily
happiness for whom I mean you could mean
for example before the abolition of
slavery if you owned a plantation
you were probably very happy what was
wrong with that picture well as his
check or Abraham Lincoln is in there was
something wrong with that picture and
let's let's sort it out so merely one
group being intensely happy is undoubted
but not as a survey the criteria I would
never even even debate this subject if
it were not for the fact that people in
the human race are so ready to kill each
other
because of a concrete belief in God and
we know that why that isn't talked about
in my book mentioned by Dawkins that
unfortunately the the brain system for
aggression and translating emotion into
action is unfortunately easily fed into
by the bit of the brain that processes
belief so tragically human beings are
programmed to take cut rolls up and
swords up in the name of what they
believe in that's the problem not
anything else
Jordan and rightly so what God was
Stalin killing thirty million people in
the name
important point a really seriously
important point um
Stalin did undoubtedly kill some people
because they were religious most of the
people that Stalin killed her I have
read the books I promise you were not
actually killed in the name of a nun oh
you're missing my point
normal he was an atheist no I know and
he was killing people in the name of
carne de la Mina's no I disagree with
that last bit completely it's like say
Hitler was a vegetarian and therefore
millions of people died in the name of
vegetarianism he was a vegetarian the
slaughters and the deaths that he caused
or not in the name or the cause of
vegetarianism it is very complicated to
work out exactly what Stalin was doing
other than that to me well I do yes
you're right in the power structure was
absolute pyramid but it certainly he
certainly wasn't killing people because
they were atheists as opposed to theists
that was the asahi was killing people
because as a rational man his conclusion
that life was so unbearable it should be
wiped out you know you guys who are it
hang on a second you guys you're in a
hey guys who are into you know rational
thinking forget all the time that
rational thinking can go in a variety of
directions it depends on your initial
presuppositions if you believe that life
is worth living which by the way under
some conditions is highly debatable
you're going to come up with a pretty
optimistic conclusion but if you've
looked at life and you think that the
suffering of most people is unbearable
and that life is evil which is what
Stellan thought you have no problems
whatsoever mobilizing everything you can
to kill as many people as you can and if
you don't have any faith like any faith
in an ultimate authority that says
essentially that life is sacred what's
to stop you from doing that
chemical morality yeah where does that
come from I started and I differed in
terms of morality I worried why yeah why
you're being very rude Jordan you're
being very rude indeed my my morality is
as it were on display simply on the way
I actually choose to live my life and
listen I did emigrate to Canada out of
choice
but I hope the Canada what I know you
deal with very difficult things yes I do
I know that and I not Stalin and it's
very unfair to say that anybody who
doesn't believe in God cannot have a
morality that was it isn't exactly what
I said I said the rabbi can go in two
directions that's what I said okay Greta
wanted a word here no I just I just
wanted to to point out that if you have
a belief in it your your belief system
and your worldview will of course help
you make decisions about what you hallo
and what you do not and and if your
belief system posits that there is an
afterlife real estate which is much more
value and much more worth than the one
here then then and that life there is
going to be much more favourable and
much more beautiful and much more
desirable than the one here then you
will want those that you love to
experience that in the best possible way
that they can and you will
you know you don't need to be an atheist
to find that life years is wretched and
not worth living that you can be a very
strong theist
let's jump in since his name has come up
a few times already on the program
tonight Richard Dawkins why don't we
hear from the man he was in the studio
not too long ago and had this to say
about that which we are speaking this
evening roll tape people who believe
believe they get their moral values from
religion where do a theists get their
moral values from if not religion I very
much hope that religious people don't
get their moral values from from
religion but we know they do we know
many we do not we do not if they did
then they'd be stoning people to death
for showing an inch of skin
if you've ever ever read many of the
books of the early books of the Old
Testament you would not wish to get your
morals from there is just gonna say
you're being awfully Old Testament with
me here but well why not I mean if
you're if you're going to say well I get
my morals from the New Testament and not
the Old Testament you're picking and
choosing you're picking and choosing on
what basis you're picking and choosing
on the basis of a modern contemporary
view of what's of what's moral so we've
talked about Dawkins we've talked about
Hitchens and I think it's fair to say in
particularly I think Justin you referred
to it in the past
years I think it's fair to say that
atheism is kind of hot now there's a
great deal of discussion about a Kathy
and I wonder what you would attribute
the rise in that heat to that's that's
complicated to be perfectly honest with
you I think a lot of the recent
discussions have been motivated by this
sort of bizarre psychological hatred of
Christian conservatives in the United
States of America it's basically the
last acceptable prejudice so this is a
reaction to very I think soul I think
some of it is there was a little things
go in fads and I said before I think
there are a theistic fads and there are
Christian feds the prejudice against
religious folk sorry statistics that we
saw in the states a couple years ago
suggested which demographic was the
least trusted was it religious or
atheists I think it was atheists so
where are you getting this sort of
belief from well I get it from making a
mistake of leaving the house and in in
encountering people who because they
consider themselves urban sophisticates
who want to be invited to the best
cocktail parties think absolutely
nothing of saying the most slanderous
libelous and frankly crude mean-spirited
things about Christians most of whom may
have never actually don't get us in
trouble but what are you talking about
well I'm talking about the fact that
it's it's almost impossible to watch
Comedy Central or to go to a movie or to
watch my favorite would be a law and
order in which inevitably the nasty
villain blowing up the abortion clinic
is this crazed Christian even though I
think there have been something like
seven abortion doctor deaths since 1972
that's seven too many but certainly
television shows often present the
born-again Christian as either a moron
or as someone to be mocked and laughed
at well we can discuss where what
world view most villains have I would
suggest most villains or labels
believing in themselves as atheists who
believe in nothing but but greed and
profit and all of that but we can
discuss contemporary culture I think
that's the kind of trivial and trite
example let's talk about the ad campaign
in Britain after the atheist ads were
put up which said there's probably no
God it's the same ad that we have you
know the slogan the some religious
organization is now trying to put up ads
that describes atheism as a dark for a
dark and sinister force that's been
defeated now that their money's run out
to put up ads a dark and sinister force
how can you compare that level of
vitriol to our ads you know you talk
about immature ads do you want to
compare the actual facts on the ground
well I'd say that there is a bit of a
premise problem there you seem to be
suggesting that if you're an atheist
then you'll you don't worry and you have
a happy life and I think what you're
doing is pricking at people who feel
that they're not worried and having
quite a happy life thank you very much I
don't know I've met atheists who are
worried and miserable and atheists who
are happy I've met Christians who are
worried and miserable and Christians
that are happy a thesis can both be good
and both evil and they well of course
but it seems to me that the ad is a
little bit of a poke at people saying
you miserable worried people handling
snakes I mean twenty people do that in
the entire United States of America
there's no reason to keep bringing that
up but again these are the stereotypes
robbed majority please important thing
is keep you know enjoy your life what
the real message is that which I think
we're all kind of agreeing up is try not
to kill anybody in the name of this god
that's important if nobody was ever had
ever been in the last 5,000 years killed
in the name of a god or gods probably
this wouldn't be an argument at all what
we're really talking about is as it were
practical morality practical ethics in
terms of the behavior the fairness of
the whole planet I would say that the
argument that atheism is a dark until it
is fork is kind of
a bit disproven when you look at young
Trottier here and you look at me I mean
we may be ugly but we're not dark or
sinister I will speak for myself I am
ugly but I am not dark and sinister and
that's the outlet Jordan Jordan one sec
Jordan no we're hearing about that add
that I think is pretty funny because
it's not the part that people
concentrate on is the second part it's
like don't worry be happy if that's like
is that supposed to be the the
alternative good that's what you're
supposed to be doing with your life if
you don't believe in God you're supposed
to be not worrying and being let me
finish the thing is is that it's
perfectly possible that the highest
value to which people should be devoted
is neither the quality of worry nor
being happy and the fact that that is
the other half of that statement
indicates to me the level of moral
reasoning that underlies the motives for
putting the outdoors but just curious
what's what's more important than either
of those things pursuing things that are
meaningful that's more important trying
to order yourself so that you act
morally really regardless of whether or
not it makes you happy or maybe even
look I just heard a journalist today a
journalist wife who talked about her
husband in Sri Lanka who pursued the
truth knowing full well that he was
going to be killed because he believed
that the totalitarian atrocities of the
state were unbearable now he wasn't not
worrying and he wasn't being happy and
the idea that those are the aims to
which life should be devoted its
Solzhenitsyn said you know that belief
is demolished by the first boots that
kick down your door and that's
absolutely right Greta and I agree with
some of that sentiment because I think
that that we do need to go beyond that
but I'm wondering if if one of the
important things that we're missing here
is the whole concept of how we live and
whether or not a values based focus but
I think faith based traditions have been
missing because we've been trying to
figure out how to do religion instead of
what religion should be helping us do
and that's figure out how to live our
lives and and if we were living in a
values-based way we wouldn't be talking
to people in
Manor those cocktail parties and we
wouldn't be blogging using the way that
we you know we're all very bold when
we're behind our keyboards and we speak
and we say things that we perhaps
wouldn't say to someone's face in a
cocktail party we wouldn't treat each
other the way that we treat each other
and we would find ways to to settle
differences that wouldn't end up with
our doors being kicked down and and and
I think that faith traditions could have
much to offer by way of helping people
walk through the difficult challenges of
being in relationship with we with each
other either on a grand scale country to
country faith tradition of faith
tradition or on oh I'm the little scale
of personal person and I think that
that's what we should be challenging one
another to do Rob that's what our face
tradition should be done can I throw it
an idea to you hear the tragedy often
you know people have react they went one
way or another to tragedy post 9/11 do
you think 9/11 encouraged more people to
say there's no God I agree with Gretchen
unfortunately the exact opposite it was
I have to say
10:11 was it was very very hard for
atheists it was very it was very
difficult we saw on 9/11 exactly what
people will do in the name of a god and
then they say and the alternative is and
the alternative is much more complicated
than one single word it's something to
do with human relationships at all
levels and it's certainly something to
do with being fulfilled and if I could
just put the little so the thing under
that poster I would say there's probably
no car and even more important than
enjoy life is be fulfilled PS don't kill
anybody in the name of god or gods after
katrina ripped through New Orleans the
belief in God skyrocketed as well and a
few weeks ago I left a message on a on a
news producers phone machine because I
was so distraught that a news report
juxtaposed to horrific stories one where
a young child had been killed in a
terrible tragedy and the next story was
a story about someone who had also been
in a tragedy but had been saved and they
played a clip of that person someone
from that person's family explaining
that they had been saved because God had
reached down and taking care of that
person and the juxtapositions of those
two stories was absolutely irresponsible
and horrific and I was I was lying or
elected reality no not because because
it reflected that if there is a God and
then God turned his or her back on that
five year old ionian that was the
opinion of a purl news okay sorry for
any wine news for Tigers what a news
producer to put those two things side by
side it was irresponsible if you want to
put those two things too I think it's
irresponsible for a news producer to put
anyone's opinion about whether God saved
someone or not on the news and I've
written letters not unfortunate because
it's just another aspect of human nature
I don't understand why that's and for
that it annoys you what's your from
Greta what would be the problem with
doing because the implication is that
someone who who dies or someone who
didn't have that kind of care given to
them a colleague of wine one time
experienced a horrific tragedy in his
own family as a result of a natural
disaster the next day in the newspaper
was a family who had obviously not
experienced that not same tragedy but it
been in the same natural disaster and
with the headline saying God was with us
so the implication is always that God is
not in the other place I mean that's
really their pity but I'm trying right
the news people should not be
reinforcing that perspective of God when
you see part of a rather strange idea
but the average person perhaps you think
that they're so dim-witted that unless
news people manipulate them and tell
them how to behave make this personal
here well no but I'm just saying that
you know the idea that these poor lambs
who are watching TV will be manipulated
by the fact that they saw human beings
say something in a moment of distress
and and fear and they expressed their
opinion and the idea that ordinary
people watching the news have to be
assisted by TV producers to think a
certain way or else I don't know what
the
I don't think what was her point well I
that's what I'm getting from that is the
people will be manipulate I wanted to
say something about those snake handlers
I know a professor at the University of
Tennessee named ralph hood he's probably
the world's leading authority on the
psychology of religion and he spent a
lot of time interviewing and and dealing
with those snake handlers and they're
very interesting people in many ways
because they say for example well you
know when you go to church nothing
necessarily happens but when I go to
church I don't know whether I'm going to
come out alive or not and they're not
stupid now
there's also something very interesting
psychologically behind what they do so
we know for example from decades of
psychotherapy work that one of the most
therapeutic things you can do for
someone is have them voluntarily face
the things they're afraid of and most
archaic cultures do that with their
juvenile males particularly during
initiation and I think there's good
evidence to suggest that that sort of
voluntary facing of fear which is
something like acceptance of
vulnerability helps regulate the nervous
system because it like lots of people
worry about really trivial things Hey
and so but if you go through something
that's really not trivial and something
that's really dangerous it gives you a
nervous system a reference point against
which you can then judge the things that
happen to you so even the snake handlers
aren't necessarily so insane just in a
word for you and then I want to cycle in
another email here they're talking about
male circumcision or what I call male
genital mutilation and only not trivial
you talk about lurking about that well
that is one example I'm talking about
that's not voluntary you talk about I'm
talking about that I'm talking about the
way she's right now you've said quite a
few things in lock-in okay sir say okay
you've said two things that are
completely contradictory okay you talk
about you that you're referring to
infants and you talked about before you
said young man just say young man man
you said voluntary and abet that this go
together if you're talking about what
this comes debt let me try to get a full
sentence out before you ensure you're
putting words in his mouth that he says
ought not to be there so what are you
trying you did say young people anyway
said young men okay young men young men
are not infants well young men are not
doing something voluntary until they're
old enough to choose for themselves what
I think a lot of this comes down to is
individualism versus group rights and I
think you had a show this this week on
individualism whether it's gone too far
I'm a big fan of individual rights
and I think that to suggest that we are
entered we should have a culture in
which we sort of give groups the ability
to self-regulate to the extent that we
put our young men or young women through
ordeals - of initiation as you put it
that's that's a Florence that's one of
the dangers of religious said that there
are many archaic cultures that do that
and that there's a reason for it I
didn't say we should do it and I didn't
say we should do okay let me jump in
here because first of all full marks do
you we did do that program last night
individualism in the Time of Cholera or
whatever we called it
let's get another email in here if we
can Michael will bring this one up we
just got this in just now it is worth
noting the emailer says that Obama in
his inaugural address acknowledged
America is made up of many faiths
including Islam and specifically
included Americans quote who do not
believe in God now I'm sure all of you
picked up on that reference in his
speech that wasn't it yes I mean that
was a fairly extraordinary thing for an
American politician to say would you
think when you heard it my immediate
thought was it's time to reprint the
American dollar and he should say in God
or not we trust you object to that being
on the dollar doesn't slight you don't
and I'm really serious right I mean
there is a serious point that actually
the In God We Trust on the dollar does
demonstrate that there is a value and
I'm picking my words carefully there is
a value of interactions between us I
give you a dollar you give it or
whatever there is a value in their
interactions which is actually if you
Jordan's were the faith that we have in
the dollar which may shake it the title
it's not in the faith of God and I
actually strangely not only don't mind
but I actually I'm actually glad that
the dollar bills have got God printed on
it and the value of the dollar is the
value a secular value of the transaction
between us because there's an allegory
Kathy I'm interested in your view on
when you I presume you watched Obama
give the inaugural I did you did it
you're the one person I've met has not
watched it you need to be in broader
circles uh if I want or I just thought
that one of the most remarkable
historical events of all time and I
thought most people would want to not
really know if I want to here take a
look if I want to hear a Marxist
professor talk for an hour I would have
gone to call it okay well if you didn't
see it I want to ask you about it then
did you watch it
ohyes inaugural I've watched parts okay
see the reference to the anyway you know
the reference to non-believers which he
said which I think probably is the first
time and not you-know-who believers have
been referred to an inaugural address in
a respectful fashion what did you think
of it when you were good for him yeah
like I fully believe that people should
express whatever opinions they have just
doesn't mean they're right I wanted to
talk about that dollar bill thing too
you know because there is a reason for
that phrase and the reason is this is
that financial interactions are
predicated on trust and Trust is
predicated on mutual integrity and the
idea that you should act in an integral
manner is rooted in as a historical
sequence of ideas that suggests that
inside each person there's something
that's divine and that's rooted in the
idea that there's something about
consciousness that mediates between
chaos and order it's a very complex set
of logic and the reason that the
financial system is embedded in that is
because trust in integrity and in moral
goodness is actually the foundation of
the financial state so it isn't just it
isn't just an accident of history and
it's not something that should be
tampered with lightly so it's only been
there for 50 years you know the in god
we trust' and doesn't go back to the
founding of the country yeah it's only
been there since Ike okay guys did I
just hear Kathy say that she didn't
listen to President Obama because if she
wanted to spend an hour listening to a
Marxist professor that's what she said
oh she didn't okay your opinion is
entirely your one entitled to it so
Marxist one thing that is forgotten he
didn't only say that you'd only
acknowledge the existence of atheists in
other speeches he's actually mentioned
humanism alongside Confucianism and
Buddhism and other ethical systems what
do you think the significant that is
well he's acknowledging that if you
don't just exist that's if that's a fact
claim I mean you know it's nice to have
that acknowledgement don't get me wrong
he's actually going further and
suggesting or actually explicitly saying
that that humanists atheists and
secularists can actually find a moral
code alongside and that complements
religious ones gretter what did you
think of India the inaugural address of
a new president is arguably you know one
of the most important speeches that will
ever be given anywhere in the world that
year and he mentioned non-believers
which if
right I don't important thing for him to
do given that many of the official
events of the inaugural week were open
and closed and grounded entirely in
Christian the presence of Christians
there was a lot of that inaugural result
so it was very good that he did include
that right in his address so it
recognized that it we aren't just
talking about a Christian nation here
there are a lot of other perspectives
there so Rob you appreciated the
reference to non-believers in the
inaugural I really do what were you
I know if offended is the right word but
were you upset about the fact that you
know Rick Warren came up there to give
an invocation rather religious leaders
can say the whole thing well
intellectually I would have preferred it
if he wasn't but it really didn't upset
me in the context of that event of that
speech and that occasion I thought in
some respect the Rick Warner and and the
the the songs and yeah and the music
contributed to an emotional tone and I
thought that acknowledging the existence
and the sort of convergence or
confluence of the put the potential
collaboration with people of different
faiths was actually more important than
me getting intellectually upset by
mental mention of the songs or In God We
Trust on the dollar I mean that was that
level of irritation acknowledging
plurality is great but if this diversity
is founded on it on a you know the
illusion that we all have this belief in
God in common which is reinforced by
these official religious ceremonies I
think that is leaving out of a lot of
people and we talk about building group
cohesion through religiosity we leave
out what five six percent of Americans
in Canada think we don't have the same
problem it would be leaving out maybe 20
percent of Canadians that's a problem
give it time
you're right you're right we give it
time it's also I mean you can't just
wipe out recognition of someone just by
labeling them as a Marxist I'm not going
to listen anything they say and so and
also you can't just say I will Rick
Warren if you're going to have
Christians okay it's recordings fine
because he's a Christian within that
scope and the definition
all those people there are different
perspectives and Rick Warren says was
one that was a very offensive I took the
initiative Smalley offense Hall
exclusion of gays and lesbians and his
work in California to have prop 8
destroyed all of that work destroyed in
California was very a single woman party
so one more thing because it but I don't
understand why I can't think that way
oh absolutely you can think that way I
just think that making putting a label
on someone and then dismissing them
because of the label is I just think
that that's unhelpful and I don't saw
okay that's fine less than four minutes
to go let me read one more thing here
this is out of the National Post from a
couple of months ago and Michael if you
could let's bring this up here we're
calling this the separation of church
and state the aggressive militants such
as Dawkins and Hitchens also don't seem
to realize that secular humanism
has already won its enemies are
frightening and vicious but marginal and
increasingly so freedom of religion in
democratic capitalism has largely meant
freedom from religion today most people
of faith do not as they should believe
that members of other faiths are
automatically damned people live like
secularists even if they don't call
themselves secularists America is
supposedly the hotbed of religious
revivalism but take a walk in Times
Square and tell me if that's the center
of a Christian civilization or a pagan
one what's in on that how do you say for
us to go home I agree with that people
often just label atheist as pagans I see
that all over the place what is that all
about you when I go to Times Square I
don't see evidence of paganism any more
than fine than Christianity so I'd like
to know what what he's basing that on
it's an unfair curcuit sure I think well
you are you with the premise of the
piece which is that you know it's a
secular sovaldi want yeah you think
that's true but the thing is is not
exactly because people can't do without
belief and so you know one of the things
and this is one of the things I think
that's really flawed in in the thinking
of people like Dawkins is that darkens
believes that if people abandon their
traditional religious beliefs including
their belief in God that they would
inevitably move to a kind of rational
secular humanism and I think that's
completely absurd I think people like
Dostoyevsky thought I think people are
we have very irrational
Souls you know very powerful romantic
emotional highly motivated souls and the
idea that the abandonment of traditional
forms of religion is going to lead us to
some sort of rational light is like look
at the 20th century why would you
believe that even for a second Cathy do
you think the secular humanists have
already won the war where it comes to
the public space no I think there's
almost well then there would be no such
thing as the culture wars I mean we
wouldn't really be having this
conversation so I could be wrong but
just for the sake of arguing I'll say
it's 5050 and it kind of goes like this
and it's yin-yang and that's I don't
think they've won
I don't think Christianity is won I
think there's always going to be that
when I say that culture wars are in
remission right now not my world
not in your world but in the last
American election was as about absent
from culture wars as you know one listen
of any of the last five or six or seven
I think there was a remarkable lack of
culture wars in this last federal
election in the United States I not
agree I think we're listening to two
different kinds of broadcasts and
reading many different newspapers and
and we thought there was a war on
so I guess other people didn't feel like
fighting it
who's the weak um I'd say conservatives
felt that their I mean to me
conservatives have their deeply held
beliefs liberals have their deeply held
beliefs the idea that there should be
some kind of fakey unity was getting
some of us a little disturbed and so
yeah I think in in my world which
unfortunately there are to it is a
divided America divided North America to
a lesser extent we thought there was a
war going on last not to go here and
okay Rob Buckman you get it here is
there a part of you that wishes that
Dawkins and Hitchens would shut up a
little bit temper temper what they say
it's simply in this that there's a huge
gulf between belief and behavior belief
is totally okay anyone could believe in
anything
invisible Flying Spaghetti Monster well
it's when you pick up a sword or
whatever and you decide to kill your
neighbor because he doesn't leave in the
same color of invisible Flying Spaghetti
Monster and in many respects it
it's the goal to separate belief from
behavior that really matters and make
all all of these debates
you know solved I'm reminded by our
producer Mareth Martin that you got the
last word the last time you were on the
whole program and I suspect that's
because you seem to wrap things up on
time which is a very nice thing when
you're trying to anchor a discussion can
I thank please for pre appearing on the
program tonight Justin trot Jake Greta
Foster Rob Buckman on the right hand
side of the table Kathie shale and
Jordan Peterson on the left-hand side of
the table for a mostly civilized and
very engaging discussion tonight thanks
everybody